So if you support several applications that run in production,
they need to run perfectly smooth to support your customers and users.
How do you know they are running perfectly?
Are you waiting until someone calls you and then you react?
There are many pieces to the operational activities puzzle and we will only
talk about those that are more closely tied to applications.
Again,
each one of these sections that we've talked about in this module
could be a complete class in their own right.
IT operations generally covers everything,
all IT functions outside of application programming management.
Now I have researched to find the best definition I
could and actually it wasn't so easy.
But I like the definition I will now show you.
It is a little wordy, but I like it the best.
Here it is.
IT Operations is responsible for the smooth functioning of the
infrastructure and operational environments that support application
deployment to internal or external customers… Okay,
a few more words.
…including the network infrastructure; server and device
management; computer ops; IT infrastructure library,
that ITIL management; and help desk services for an organization.
I would like to credit Joe Hertvik for this definition.
So let's talk about the scope of operational support for this section.
Here's a quick note on scope.
I would like to provide some scope and boundaries to this section.
Remember operational support is a very broad discipline so I want to focus this
section on those activities that are more aligned closely with applications and
not the broad and wide operations discipline.
All the items I'm about to talk about could in fact be
managed and run by the application teams,
especially in smaller companies.
That's totally fine.
The important thing is that you understand as a new manager
that there are operational responsibilities,
that either you, your team,
or a dedicated ops team must manage and address to support your applications.
Okay, the first ID management,
people may need to have IDs to access the systems that you support.
Application feature authorization,
in other words I have an ID to access your system,
but you're only going to let me do a few functions,
and maybe to a manager you might give many,
many more functions.
You're going to need to do the hot fixes,
break and fix and repairing problems that occur.
It may happen at any time, in the middle of the night,
on weekends, you've got to jump in and make those fixes.
Off-the-shelf software installation and configuration
for business application support.
So you may have other off-the-shelf products or tools that you're
going to need to be installed and supported as well.
Database maintenance.
Applications and users maintain the database from a
database integrity viewpoint, in other words,
they know their data and it's business meaning,
whereas operations maintains it from an efficiency and processing viewpoint,
you know, cleaning up, deleting records,
and re-indexing and doing performance tuning and things like that.
Next would be data movement.
You're going to maybe do file transfers and moving transactional data,
say to a warehouse database, things like that.
So they'll be things that move data around and you need to make sure it
doesn't move successfully and is it moving the right data.
And then lastly,
monitoring application performance and issues and alerting the
emergency resources when a problem occurs.
Now let's look at a few more application operational
activities you need to be aware of.
Here are a few more application operational activities to be aware of,
integration with business partners, customers or other entities.
You might do FTP, EDI, ECommerce, things like that,
copying data between servers,
all those things need to be looked at and be made aware of.
The help desk,
now the help desk duties are sometimes split between IT
applications help desk and an IT operations help desk.
Usually the ops help desk is what they call level 1
and the app help desk is level 2.
Maybe you have your level 2 people assigned by
application experience or something like that.
Every company may be a bit different.
Job scheduling management to ensure that all required jobs run according
to schedule on all platforms for all applications.
Many times things are scheduled because they're moving data from one
system to another or creating data warehouses,
creating reports, who knows, all sorts of things.
Also,
actively monitoring and then triggering alerts and generating
tickets and then informing key people of an issue.
You need to define what are the rules and what are
the things you need to monitor, build triggers around those monitoring models,
if they don't meet the certain thresholds you're going to generate
tickets that go into a ticketing system and maybe automatically
inform someone that there's an issue.
This is very proactive.
The last thing you'll want is the CEO calling you at
home because the system is down.
You want to know first, not last, and have a chance to fix it.
Call center,
many times you're going to have maybe a formal call center or maybe
your little team just has one particular phone number that gets called
and everyone takes turns taking those calls.
It can be very informal to very sophisticated.
Escalation, you need a clear escalation path for when an issue is determined,
who is informed and have it move quickly up the org chart as needed.
The ops role is always looking to find, fix,
and inform on any issues that may occur.
Logging and tracking,
apps need to constantly log and track their activity at all times.
Typically software engineers build the functional specifications,
but forget that logging and tracking should be probably
part of the technical specifications.
So in the event an issue does happen,
it is so easy to review and look in the log and see what the issue might be.
So we have covered a plethora of operational topics related to applications,
and again, these should all be part of your business,
whether partially staffed by your dev team or a separate
ops team or some combination of both. Now let's move on to an area that many times is overlooked and not appreciated.